\chapter{Theoretical Background} % {{{

In order to analyze and compare development workflows a series of scientific
research methodologies were used. This chapter gives an introduction to those
and tries to vindicate their usage.

\section{Grounded Theory} % {{{

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\textwidth]{grounded_theory}
  \caption{Process of theory building using the grounded theory as research
    method according to \citeauthor{Strauss1990} \cite{Pandit1996}.}
\end{figure}

The grounded theory approach is a systematic research methodology first
published by \textcite{Glaser1967} in \citeyear{Glaser1967}. It first was
applied in social sciences gathering data and discovering a theory after an
analysis of the rallied data. Grounded theory is mostly used in qualitative
research and operates quite different from traditional research methods. It
always starts with the collection of data about the researched subject.
Thereafter the collection items can be marked with codes which later can be
grouped into sort of categories. They are the base of an emerging theory which
can be established out of the gathered data and it's analysis.

However \citeauthor{Glaser1967} have established different opinions on the
grounded theory approach \cite{Heath2004}. This has lead to different
appendages, which either favorite the Glaser or the Strauss understanding of
how the grounded theory works. The most important difference seems to be the
technique used to code the samples into categories. Glaser favors a
systematical and well defined approach for the coding process while Strauss
favors a more dynamic approach coding the elements as soon as they become
visible. The second approach was described by \textcite{Strauss1990} in
\citeyear{Strauss1990}. Both methods have their benefits and downsides, however
in this analysis the \citeauthor{Strauss1990} approach was chosen as a better
fitting research method.

Due to the quite dynamic development approach and nescience about the different
development processes, a grounded theory approach was reviewed as a good
scientific research method to gather all the required data and use it as a base
research method.

% }}}

\section{Qualitative Content Analysis} % {{{

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.7\textwidth]{mayring}
  \caption{Step model of inductive category development in quantitative content
    analysis according to \citeauthor{Mayring2008} \cite{Mayring2000,Mayring2008}.}
\end{figure}

Another quite useful research method is the qualitative content analysis first
published by \textcite{Mayring2008}. It is quite related to the previous
mentioned grounded theory however differs from it's approach. The main idea is
to apply methods of qualitative content analysis to the research question and
transfer them to a step by step interpretation which can be used for
quantitative content analysis \cite{Mayring2000}. This leads to a framework one
can use to provide an empirical yet methodologically controlled analysis which
follows a previously established content analysis canon.

The centerpiece of this method is the finding and establishment of categories
in which the analysed data can be put. It also considers ways to carefully
check and review the found categories. This is also known as \emph{feedback
loops}. The establishment of categories can be done either in an inductive or
deductive way. For this analysis it makes of course sense to use an inductive
category development.

When using an inductive approach for category generation, the research method
begins with the research question and the ensuing determination of category
definition. This defines what aspects will be taken into account during the
analysis. Following the analysis further possible categories may appear. Those
categories will then be revised and checked if they are valid categories for
this analysis. Furthermore they can be split up or be set as subcategories of
previously found categories. This step will be iterated through the research
data until a final interpretation and analysis can be established.

This qualitative content analysis approach supplements the grounded theory in a
quite useful way, especially for the comparison of different development
models. As such this research method was taken into account.

% }}}

\section{Application in Computer Science} % {{{

Qualitative research methods such as the above have their origin in the social
sciences. However they also have their right of existence in computer science.
They provide excellent research methods and tools to examine existing phenomena
and domains but not only. As such they are especially useful in areas like
software engineering, computer science education or computer science research
methods. The following list should stand for an array of examples from
different areas of the computer science research field.

\textcite{Hazzan2006} for example discuss the use and plausibility of
qualitative research methods in computer science education. Similarly
\textcite{Meerbaum-Salant2010} explore different ways how to learn computer
science concepts with qualitative analysis methods.

\textcite{Armstrong2006} uses qualitative research methods to discuss the usage
of object oriented programming vocabulary in different papers and books. The
grounded theory is used by \textcite{Perry2000} to outline the strengths and
weaknesses of empirical research in software engineering. It is also used by
\textcite{Sarker2001} for building and developing a process model of
collaboration in virtual teams.

Finally \textcite{Bainbridge2003} use the grounded theory as well to analyze
music queries. \textcite{Kaplan1994} use qualitative research methods for
evaluating computer information systems.

As one can see, there is quite some effort going on to use qualitative research
methods, especially the grounded theory, in computer science. However it must
be noted, that such a qualitative analysis might not fit for every research
matter and often is suited for meta or process analysis.

% }}}

\section{Software Engineering Comparison Models} % {{{


% }}}

% }}}
