\chapter{Development Process Analysis} % {{{
\label{cha:Development Process Analysis}

\section{Project Analyses Criteria} % {{{
\label{sec:Project Analyses Criteria}

% }}}

\cleardoublepage
\input{chapters/03_analysis_drupal}

\cleardoublepage
\input{chapters/03_analysis_plone}

\cleardoublepage
\input{chapters/03_analysis_python}

\cleardoublepage
\input{chapters/03_analysis_php}

\cleardoublepage
\input{chapters/03_analysis_gnome}

\cleardoublepage
\input{chapters/03_analysis_kde}

\cleardoublepage
\section{Definition and Origin of the Catalogue} % {{{
\label{sec:Definition and Origin of the Catalogue}

To characterize the development process of FOSS project, the following
catalogue was established. By covering all listed points one a project should
have been analysed thoroughly and lead to a reasonable breakdown of all
projects.

\begin{description}

  \item[Description of the Project] A general description about the project
    should be provided to inform the reader about the goals and current state
    of a project.

  \item[Project Category] In order to provide methods to compare projects, the
    project category can help to contrast projects of the same and other
    categories. Examples are programming languages or content management
    systems.

  \item[Scope of Analysis] As FOSS projects often are hard to analyze due to
    their size and unclear definition of modules, the scope will be limited to
    a well known subset of the whole project.

  \item[License] Some projects use their own license and some use the well
    known General Public License. It is interesting to find out whether this
    makes any difference in the development process of a module.

  \item[History] As only projects with a quite long history are analyzed it
    makes sense to glance at the project's history.

  \begin{description}

    \item[Founders] In some projects, the original founders are still present
      and have a influential voice, in others the original authors are no
      longer involved. To analyzed this further, the authors have to be
      introduced and their role will be analyzed in the community part.

    \item[Project Age] Projects always need time to evolve and to find their
      best development process. As this needs time, the project age can give
      some information in what development process state this project is and
      how it will evolve in the future.

  \end{description}

  \item[Community] The people behind the project are the driving force. Without
    them, a project would not exist. Therefore it is important to analyze the
    diverse community of a project.

  \begin{description}

    \item[Size of the Community] An important measure is the approximate size
      of a community. Several structural changes inside the project can depend
      on this size.

    \item[Communication inside the Project] The communication is a vital thing
      in an open project. It is interesting to compare the different methods of
      communication in several projects depending on their development
      structure and size.

    \item[Conferences and Meet-ups] Meetings of developers are an important
      element of the development process in FOSS projects. Also it shows, that
      there is enough interest available to provide the money needed for
      preparing such events.

    \item[Roles] The development process is often defined and lead by important
      roles in the project. Also, depending on what role a person has in the
      project, his influence varies. 

    \item[Role of the Founders] In some projects the founders are still
      actively involved and in some not. Depending on that, the founders often
      have a very important role in the project development process.

  \end{description}

  \item[Release Process] In the FOSS world an often heard statement is that a
    new version will be released when it is ready. In fact however quite all
    projects have a certain release schedule or process they follow.

  \begin{description}

    \item[Version Naming] Each project provides a specific version naming
      scheme to which they adopt and which characterizes major, minor or bug
      fixing releases. This information is vital to understand the project's
      release schedule.

    \item[Characterization of Major and Minor Releases] Most projects provide
      some kind of major releases with new features which is often incompatible
      with previous releases, minor releases which mostly are backwards
      compatible and provide new features and finally bug fixing only releases.
      This however differs from project to project.

    \item[Release Schedule] Even if there are no fixed release cycles, most
      projects have nevertheless a release schedule in action. The release
      schedule defines deadlines and important steps in the process of creating
      a new release.

    \item[Important Steps in the Schedule] These often define freezes or
      specific points in time when all members of the project are restricted to
      for example not provide new code in order to increase the stability of
      the new release.

  \end{description}

  \item[Development] The actual development is closely interweaved with the
    release process and defines how and when the development of a project takes
    place.

  \begin{description}

    \item[Development Lead] In fact, most FOSS projects are lead by groups of
      people who define new features and lead the development process.
      Additionally there are hardly any projects which have a completely
      unstructured development process and have no development leaders in
      place.

    \item[Development Workflow] The actual development process as often defined
      by the project leaders provides ways and methods to propose and develop
      new features for the upcoming release.

    \item[Feature Inclusion Process] This inclusion process is used by some
      projects which defines process how and when new features and come into
      the project.

  \end{description}

\end{description}

% }}}

\section{PostgreSQL Project Analysis} % {{{

\marginpar{\includegraphics[width=\marginparwidth]{postgresql/logo}}

The PostgreSQL project provides an \ac{ORDBMS} which runs on all major systems
such as Linux, UNIX, Microsoft Windows or Mac OS X
\cite{PostgreSQLAbout,PostgreSQLFAQ}. The group behind the project is known as
PostgreSQL Global Development Group which consists of several volunteers and
employed developers. PostgreSQL is quite popular amongst it's users and has won
several prizes for the best database management system \cite{PostgreSQLAwards}.
According to the project it is the leading \ac{FOSS} database system with
thousands of users and contributors \cite{PostgreSQLPressKit}.

\subsection{Project Category}

PostgreSQL is a database management system, more specifically a \ac{ORDBMS}
\cite{PostgreSQLAbout}.

\subsection{Scope of Analysis}

The PostgreSQL Core Distribution will be analyzed, which consists of the
PostgreSQL database server, several tools and bindings around it
\cite{PostgreSQLDownload}.

\subsection{License}

The PostgreSQL project makes use of the PostgreSQL license, which is a
\ac{FOSS} license \cite{PostgreSQLFAQ,PostgreSQLLicense}. It only requires to
maintain the copyright and licensing information in the licensed source code
and therefore it is quite similar to a BSD license.

\subsection{History}

The project was started in 1986 by Lawrence A. Rowe and Michael R. Stonebraker
at the University of California in Berkeley under the name POSTGRES
\cite{PostgreSQLHistory}. Not until 1996 it was developed in a university style
fashion trying to explore new areas in database management systems. It was then
released as \ac{FOSS} by two students of Stonebraker with the new name
PostgreSQL the adopted \ac{SQL}. It then received a big development boost and
emerged to one of the leading \acp{ORDBMS}.

\subsection{Community}

The PostgreSQL project has a quite large community available which will be
described in the following.

\begin{description}

  \item[Size of the Community] According to the project there are 6 core team
    members, 38 major contributors and 42 contributors
    \cite{PostgreSQLContributors}. Adding no longer active persons the number
    sums up to around 140. The number of total contributors might however be
    higher, as the project only includes people who have made contributions
    over a long time.

  \item[Communication inside the Project] The communication mostly happens over
    mailing lists, although also \ac{IRC} channels exist. The most important
    mailing list for development is the pgsql-hackers mailing list
    \cite{PostgreSQLDevFAQ}.

  \item[Conferences and Meet-ups] The most important international conference
    is the annual PgCon which first happened in 2007 \cite{PostgreSQLEvents}.
    However there are a lot of local conferences and workshops available.

  \item[Roles] The developers are split into three groups
    \cite{PostgreSQLContributors}. The core team decides on the general
    direction of the PostgreSQL project as well as the release cycle and the
    releases. Major contributors are people who introduced or maintain big
    features to the project. The contributors are all other who provide patches
    to the project.

  \item[Role of the Founders] Michael R. Stonebraker and Lawrence A. Rowe did
    not follow the project when it was published as \ac{FOSS} in 1996
    \cite{PostgreSQLHistory}. They are therefore no longer actively involved in
    the project.

\end{description}

\subsection{Release Process}

The used release process is highly structured and will be described in the
following.

\begin{description}

  \item[Version Naming] The PostgreSQL project uses a three digit number scheme
    which consists of a major, minor and micro number
    \cite{PostgreSQLVersioning}.

  \item[Characterization of Major and Minor Releases] The incrementation of a
    major or minor number defines a major release including new features and
    often backwards incompatible changes \cite{PostgreSQLVersioning}. Such a
    release occurs roughly once a year
    \cite{PostgreSQLDevelopment,PostgreSQLFAQ}. For each major release there
    exist a number of minor releases which are defined by incrementing the
    micro version number. Only bug and security fixes are allowed for those
    releases. Each major release is supported for five years by the PostgreSQL
    project. However in some cases the project can decide to drop support for a
    specific release if bugs cannot be resolved without risking the stability.

  \item[Release Schedule] As major releases occur every year, the project uses
    the same release schedule every year along with some minor improvements
    from the last years \cite{PostgreSQLDevelopment}. The release schedule gets
    planned and decided during the PgCon conference. It basically starts each
    June with a commit review in which possible patches might be included in
    the next major release. Such reviews, also known as Commit Fest happen four
    times each two months apart. In the month between an alpha release is
    published. After the last Commit Fest, more alpha releases can follow, if
    not beta releases are published. If no more critical errors are found
    several release candidates will be published which will lead to the next
    major release.

  \item[Important Steps in the Schedule] The Commit Fest are the only
    possibility to add new features to the project and are therefore a vital
    part of the development process
    \cite{PostgreSQLDevelopment,PostgreSQLCommitFest}. 

\end{description}

\subsection{Development}

The development of the PostgreSQL project is closely entangled with the release
process and will be described in the following.

\begin{description}

  \item[Development Lead] The PostgreSQL project is mostly driven by the core
    team \cite{PostgreSQLDevFAQ,PostgreSQLFAQ,PostgreSQLContributors}. Quite
    all decisions are made by them as well as most new features and code
    contributions.

  \item[Development Workflow] Small patches are often submitted directly to the
    repository if they are done by a major contributor or a core team member
    \cite{PostgreSQLDevFAQ}. All other patches however have to be reviewed and
    therefore be sent to the pgsql-hackers mailing list. New features are
    proposed in the Commit Fests.

  \item[Feature Inclusion Process] The already mentioned Commit Fest is a
    periodic break in which no new development is done, however already
    existing patches are reviewed and get feedback \cite{PostgreSQLCommitFest}.
    Not only the core team does those reviews but also other developers. A
    single Commit Fest usually runs for about one month explaining the gap of
    one month between each Commit Fest. One such event is lead by a Commit Fest
    Manager who is responsible that all submitted patches will be reviewed.
    Often, a review results in a discussion on the mailing list and follows an
    acceptance, a return with feedback or a rejection. A patch can have several
    states, depending on whether it is in progress or if it is finished
    \cite{PostgreSQLCommitFestRunning}. If a patch is in progress, the
    following states might apply.

    \begin{description}

      \item[Needs Review] A patch is not reviewed and waiting for a review.

      \item[Waiting on Author] A new version of the patch is expected by the
        author.

      \item[Discussing Review Results] The review was done, however it is
        discussed on the mailing list.

      \item[Ready for Committer] The review was done and no issues were
        found. It is now waiting for a final review.

    \end{description}

    The in progress states of a patch are the following.

    \begin{description}

      \item[Returned With Feedback] The patch was reviewed and feedback was
        given. A new version of the patch is expected for the next Commit Fest.

      \item[Rejected] The patch was rejected and won't make it into the next
        major release.

      \item[Committed] The patch was applied and no remaining issues are
        assured.

    \end{description}

\end{description}

% }}}

\section{MySQL/MariaDB Project Analysis} % {{{

\marginpar{\includegraphics[width=\marginparwidth]{mariadb/logo}}

MySQL is according to the project the world's most used \ac{ORDBMS}
\cite{MySQLSun}. It runs on all major platforms and is widely used for many web
applications. MySQL was originally developed by MySQL AB, later bought by Sun
Microsystems and now owned by Oracle Corporation
\cite{MySQLSun,MySQLOracle,MySQLHistory}.

MariaDB was forked from the original MySQL when Oracle bought Sun Corporations
as it was unclear how the development and licensing of MySQL would change after
Oracle's acquisition \cite{MySQLAbout,MySQLBehind}. It is intended to be a
\emph{drop-in} replacement for MySQL with full compatibility to it. Also, many
of the original MySQL developers moved to the MariaDB project making it
interesting to analyze both projects together.

\subsection{Project Category}

MySQL and MariaDB are database management systems, more specifically
\acp{ORDBMS} \cite{MySQLAbout}.

\subsection{Scope of Analysis}

The MySQL Server package and MariaDB will be analyzed. Both provide a
compatible database server together with several tools for running it.

\subsection{License}

MySQL is dual-licensed under the \ac{GPL} and a proprietary license. MariaDB is
single licensed under the \ac{GPL} \cite{MySQLLicense}.

\subsection{History}

The MySQL project was started in 1994 by Michael Widenius and David Axmark by
lanching the company MySQL AB \cite{MySQLHistory}. Originally it was a clone of
the at that time quite popular mSQL project. In 2000 MySQL was released as
\ac{FOSS} under a dual licensing model. Sun Microsystems bought MySQL AB in
2008 which lead to the abandonment of the MySQL founders Micheal Widenius and
David Axmark \cite{MySQLSun}. In 2010 Oracle Corporation bought Sun
Microsystems and announced changes to the current development processes
\cite{MySQLOracle}. As the future of MySQL in terms of \ac{FOSS} was quite
unclear at that time Michael Widenius forked MySQL in order to provide a
community developed, \ac{FOSS} database \cite{MySQLBehind}. The first version
of MariaDB was released in 2010 as MariaDB 5.1 which is compatible to MySQL 5.1
\cite{MySQLMariaDB5.1}. Since then the MariaDB project tries to stay compatible
with MySQL but also to provide better performance and more features.

\subsection{Community}

As most of the key-authors of MySQL moved to different projects, such as
MariaDB and as there is not much insight available about the current happenings
inside Oracle, the MariaDB community will be analyzed including facts about the
pre Oracle era of MySQL.

\begin{description}

  \item[Size of the Community] The specific size of the community is not
    known, however it is fracturing after the two acquisitions by Sun
    Microsystems and Oracle Corporation. The newly founded Monty Program Ab
    company however lists at least 20 people working on MariaDB
    \cite{MySQLBehind}.

  \item[Communication inside the Project] The communication mostly happens
    over mailing lists, although also \ac{IRC} channels exist. The most
    important mailing list for development are the maria-developers and
    maria-captains mailing lists \cite{MySQLDevelopers}.

  \item[Conferences and Meet-ups] The MariaDB project has not yet set up a
    conference, however the MySQL project mostly meet at the yearly MySQL
    Users Conference \& Expo which first happened in 2003
    \cite{MySQLConference}.

  \item[Roles] The developers are split into two groups. A developer is a
    person who produces enhancements and new features for MariaDB
    \cite{MySQLContributingCode,MySQLContributing,MySQLCaptain}. However he
    has no right to commit his work which has to be reviewed. The captains
    are developers who are working for a long time for the project and have
    made substantial improvements. To become a captain one has to make a
    formal request on which the other captains will vote \cite{MySQLCaptain}.
    Captains give the direction of the project, do the code reviews and take
    care of the project. Finally there exists a Release Coordinator which
    normally is a captain \cite{MySQLReleaseCoordinator}. By definition he
    gains no additional rights and only leads the communication and release
    management of the project.

  \item[Role of the Founders] Micheal Widenius took a vital role in the fork
    and new project MariaDB \cite{MySQLBehind,MySQLAbout}. If nevertheless
    MariaDB is mostly driven by MariaDB captains (which he belongs too) he
    has an important voice in the community and still gives general
    directions. David Axmark however left Sun in 2008 and is not really
    actively involved in either the MySQL nor MariaDB project however follows
    their development.

\end{description}

\subsection{Release Process}

The used release process is structured and will be described in the following.

\begin{description}

  \item[Version Naming] The MySQL/MariaDB project uses a three digit number
    scheme which consists of a major, minor and micro number
    \cite{MySQLVersion}.

  \item[Characterization of Major and Minor Releases] The incrementation of a
    major number defines big and often incompatible changes to their
    predecessors \cite{MySQLVersion}. In the current releases it marks the
    file format in which the database is stored. A major release is defined
    by an incrementation of the minor number and allows new features to be
    added to the release. In most cases the releases are backwards
    compatible, but if not, there are always upgrade paths available
    \cite{MySQLMariaDB5.1}. Finally, the micro number defines minor releases
    in which only bug and security fixes may apply.

  \item[Release Schedule] The MariaDB project does not have a fixed release
    schedule and is quite similar to the MySQL release schedule
    \cite{MySQLReleaseCriteria,MySQLRoadmap,MySQLPlans}. It has criteria in
    place when specific releases can happen. After the last stable major
    release, all new features for the next stable major release will be
    collected. Every feature a MariaDB developer agrees to implement in the
    timeframe to the next major release will be considered as a new feature.
    After most features are nearly finished one or several alpha releases
    follow. The criteria for beta releases are that the proposed features are
    finished and no serious bugs are open. The gamma or release candidate
    releases are believed to be ready for general usage, however testing is
    still required. Finally the stable release should have no more open bugs
    or critical errors and is ready for general usage.

  \item[Important Steps in the Schedule] The feature proposal period, alpha
    and beta releases are of course the most important steps in this schedule
    as they restrict new features or code changes more and more
    \cite{MySQLReleaseCriteria}. For example, after a beta release the whole
    API must not be changed anymore.

\end{description}

\subsection{Development}

The development of the MySQL/MariaDB project is loosely entangled with the
release process and will be described in the following.

\begin{description}

  \item[Development Lead] The development of the MariaDB project is mostly
    driven by the MariaDB captains \cite{MySQLContributing,MySQLDevelopers}.
    The founder of MariaDB and MySQL Micheal Widenius plays an important role
    and even if not stated by the project has an important voice about the
    direction.

  \item[Development Workflow] Small patches are often submitted directly to
    the repository if they are done by a captain. All other patches by
    developers will be reviewed and applied if they suit the project well
    \cite{MySQLRoadmap,MySQLPlans}. Bigger features will be accepted after
    each major release.

  \item[Feature Inclusion Process] After a major release a developer can
    propose new features \cite{MySQLPlans}. A feature will be accepted if a
    developer accepts that feature and is willing to implement it
    \cite{MySQLContributingCode,MySQLContributing}. It then will move to the
    so called worklog page of MariaDB where other developers see the current
    status of a feature. A feature can have multiple states, such as the
    following.

    \begin{description}

      \item[Assigned] The feature was assigned to a developer who is in
        charge to provide the feature for the next release.

      \item[Cancelled] The feature was cancelled for this release but might
        be proposed for the next.

      \item[Code-Review] The feature will be reviewed by other MariaDB
        developers and captains.

      \item[Complete] The feature is ready and will be part of the next
        release.

      \item[In-Documentation] The feature is completed code-wise but still
        has to be documented.

      \item[In-Progress] A developer is currently implementing this feature.

      \item[On-Hold] The feature will not be developed further until the
        status can be changed back to in progress. This could happen if a
        technical problem arises or the feature is put up for a discussion.

      \item[Un-Assigned] The feature is still unassigned and no developer has
        claimed this feature yet.

    \end{description}

\end{description}

% }}}

\section{Fedora Project Analysis} % {{{

\marginpar{\includegraphics[width=\marginparwidth]{fedora/logo}}

The Fedora project provides a so called Linux distribution which is a
collection of \ac{FOSS} and is based on the Linux kernel
\cite{FedoraAbout,FedoraTogami}. The distribution is also called Fedora
operating system or Fedora project, however the latter one refers to the
community which builds the project. As it only features \ac{FOSS}, the Fedora
operating system is also \ac{FOSS}. The mission of the project is to lead the
advancement and it is also known to incorporate new products and software very
quickly. The project is mostly sponsored by Red Hat, however due to it's
structure it can be seen as independent from a companies influence.

\subsection{Project Category}

The Fedora operating system is, as the name already states, an operating system
\cite{FedoraAbout}.

\subsection{Scope of Analysis}

The operating system provided by the Fedora project will be analyzed, which
consists of a large collection of \ac{FOSS} needed to run and work on a
computer.

\subsection{License}

As the projects goal is to provide a product which only consists of \ac{FOSS}
only Free and Open Source licenses are allowed \cite{FedoraLicensing}. The
project provides a list of acceptable licenses. For own software creations the
\ac{GPL} is mostly used.

\subsection{History}

The original Fedora project was created in 2002 by Warren Togami in order to
enhance the quality and number of packages available for the at that time
existing Red Hat Linux distribution
\cite{FedoraAbout,FedoraTogami,FedoraHistoricalSchedules}. In 2003 the
development of Red Hat Linux stopped and was merged with the Fedora project.
Since then the Fedora project provides a community distribution while Red Hat
Enterprise Linux is an officially supported Linux distribution which derives
from Fedora versions. Until 2006 the operating system was known as Fedore Core.
Later the project changed the name to Fedora. The name Fedora originates from
the Red Hat logo which shows a person with a fedora hat.

\subsection{Community}

The Fedora project has a quite large community available which will be
described in the following.

\begin{description}

  \item[Size of the Community] The exact size of the community is unknown,
    however the project consists of a quite large community
    \cite{FedoraStatistics}. For example the total number of active accounts
    exceeds 30,000 people. This number however does not describe the actual
    size accurately as it includes many users of the operating system.

  \item[Communication inside the Project] Most of the communication is done
    through mailing lists \cite{FedoraAbout,FedoraJoin,FedoraSIG}. Each of
    the mailing list is quite focused on a certain sub-topic, however the
    most important general development related mailing list is the devel
    mailing list. Additional communication happens through several \ac{IRC}
    channels, forums, blogs or the weekly newsletter
    \cite{FedoraFWN,FedoraCommunicating}.

  \item[Conferences and Meet-ups] Since 2005 the Fedora project organizes the
    Fedora Users and Developers Conference (FUDCon) which is held annually in
    various places around the world \cite{FedoraFUDCon}. Usually the
    conference takes place in several regions in several continents.

  \item[Roles] The Fedora project uses a quite flat structure with several
    teams and \acp{SIG} \cite{FedoraJoin,FedoraCommunicating,FedoraSIG}. Each
    team or \ac{SIG} is in charge for a specific sub project or area in the
    project. Each team is lead by one or several people and the usual way to
    be a part of a specific team is to provide several contributions until
    one can apply. Examples for such teams and \acp{SIG} are Release
    Engineering, Desktop or Usability. The technical leadership is handled by
    the \ac{FESCo} which is a community elected team and handles new
    features, \acp{SIG} or technical matters \cite{FedoraFESCo}. The general
    direction and guiding decisions however are handled of the Fedora project
    board which consists of five community elected persons and four appointed
    by Red Hat \cite{FedoraBoard}.

  \item[Role of the Founders] Warrent Togami is still involved in the Fedora
    project, however he works more on Fedora related projects, such as
    SpamAssassin or K12Linux which is a distribution built on top of Fedora
    \cite{FedoraTogami}.

\end{description}

\subsection{Release Process}

The used release process is highly structured and will be described in the
following.

\begin{description}

  \item[Version Naming] The Fedora project uses a single number versioning
    scheme \cite{FedoraHistoricalSchedules,FedoraLifeCycle}. This single
    number defines major releases.

  \item[Characterization of Major and Minor Releases] There are no minor
    releases as updates to the operating system come via single updates of
    the affected packages \cite{FedoraHistoricalSchedules,FedoraLifeCycle}.
    Therefore each incrementation of the version number defines a new major
    release.

  \item[Release Schedule] The Fedora project uses a fixed release cycle with
    a new major release every six months
    \cite{FedoraLifeCycle,FedoraReleaseEngineering}. Each major release is
    then maintained until one month after another two releases or 13 months.
    The release schedule is proposed by the Release Engineering team and
    approved by the \ac{FESCo}. In some cases, the schedule can be slightly
    adjusted if critical bugs appear and can't be solved in the original time
    frame. After a major release the planning and development can start. One
    week before the alpha release, no new feature will be accepted. The alpha
    release will be followed by a beta and final release candidate release.
    Depending on whether each of the previous releases was postponed or not
    the final release will be published approximately six months after the
    previous major release.

  \item[Important Steps in the Schedule] The most important steps are the
    feature acceptance, feature freeze and feature complete milestones in the
    release schedule \cite{FedoraLifeCycle}. In each of the named steps the
    \ac{FESCo} will decide if a feature will be accepted or be in the next
    release depending on it's completeness.

\end{description}

\subsection{Development}

The development of the Fedora project is quite entangled with the release
process and will be described in the following.

\begin{description}

  \item[Development Lead] The development of the Fedora project is mostly
    driven by the \ac{FESCo} which decides on new features and the technical
    direction of the project \cite{FedoraFESCo}.

  \item[Development Workflow] The development process of the Fedora project
    is a quite open one \cite{FedoraReleaseEngineering,FedoraSIG}. As already
    stated above, there are many \acp{SIG} available which steer the
    development of a certain area in the project. Depending on the \ac{SIG}
    the development workflow can vary, however the general direction is
    always given by the \ac{FESCo}.

  \item[Feature Inclusion Process] To propose a feature for the next major
    release a formal feature proposal has to be made
    \cite{FedoraFeatures,FedoraFESCo}. This includes a description of the
    problem, an owner, the current status and several other points. Any
    Fedora community member can propose them and the \ac{FESCo} decides on
    the acceptance of the feature. Additionally a feature can be dropped if
    it is not completed at the feature freeze or before the beta release or
    if the owner does not update the feature status. A feature can be either
    incomplete when the proposal is not ready, ready when it is disposed for
    review, ready for \ac{FESCo} when it can be proposed to the committee and
    finally accepted if the voting by the \ac{FESCo} was successful.

\end{description}

% }}}

\section{Debian Project Analysis} % {{{

\marginpar{\includegraphics[width=\marginparwidth]{debian/logo}}

The Debian project provides an operating system on top of various kernels, such
as the Linux kernel \cite{DebianAbout,DebianPorts}. Even if there are other
kernels available, such as the FreeBSD, NetBSD or Hurd kernel, Linux is the
most prominent one. Therefore, Debian often gets called Debian \ac{GNU}/Linux.
The mission of the Debian project is to provide a free operating system in the
meaning of \ac{FOSS}, to provide a full featured operating system with a hight
standard and to have a big evolving community. The Debian project is often
known as a very stable operating system and therefore is often used on servers.

\subsection{Project Category}

The Debian operating system is, as the name already states, an operating
system.

\subsection{Scope of Analysis}

The Debian \ac{GNU}/Linux operating system provided by the Debian project will
be analyzed, which consists of a large collection of \ac{FOSS} needed to run
and work on a computer.

\subsection{License}

The project's goal is to provide an operating system consisting entirely of
\ac{FOSS} \cite{DebianLicense,DebianFAQ}. However, it is possible to install
non-free software too. According to the \ac{DFSG} the project itself however
only accepts free software licenses, but the \ac{GPL} is mostly used for own
creations.

\subsection{History}

The Debian project was created by Ian Murdock in 1993, in order to provide a
distribution which was developed in an open style and in the spirit of a
\ac{FOSS} development process \cite{DebianAbout,DebianHistory,Sadowski2008}. At
that time, the concept of a distribution was quite new and Debian can be
counted as one of the early distributions, although it was not the first. The
name is a fusion between Ian and the first name of his wife, Debra. The Debian
project established several policies and contracts to ensure the future freedom
of the project. Debian still is the most significant distribution that is not
backed by a commercial entity.

\subsection{Community}

The Debian project has a large community available which will be described in
the following.

\begin{description}

  \item[Size of the Community] The community size is quite large and ranges
    between 800 and 1000 active developers \cite{Perrier2011,DebianOrg}.

  \item[Communication inside the Project] Most of the communication is
    handled over several mailing lists
    \cite{DebianMailingLists,DebianFAQ,DebianNewMembers}. For quite every
    aspect or subproject there is a mailing list available. The most
    important for development is the debian-devel mailing list. Additionally
    there are many \ac{IRC} channels, forums and blogs available.

  \item[Conferences and Meet-ups] The most important conference in the Debian
    project is the annual DebConf which took first place in 2000
    \cite{DebianDebConf}. It has taken place in various regions and
    continents worldwide so far.

  \item[Roles] The Debian project uses a quite hierarchic structure with
    several teams \cite{DebianOrg,Sadowski2008}. A Debian Contributor is any
    person who contributes to the project, but has no additional rights
    \cite{DebianFAQ}. Debian Maintainer have restricted access capabilities
    \cite{DebianMaintainer}. To become a Debian Maintainer one has to go
    through a formal process requesting the role. At least one Debian
    Developer must approve that person. The Debian Developers finally have
    full access rights and often maintain parts of the project
    \cite{DebianDev}. Then there is a project leader who gets elected by the
    Debian community every year \cite{DebianOrg,DebianVoting}. Beneath the
    project leader there is a technical committee which drives the project's
    technical decisions. Additionally there are many teams in charge for
    parts of the project, such as Release Engineering, Ports or the
    distribution of the project.

  \item[Role of the Founders] Ian Murdock led the project from it's beginning
    until 1996 as the project leader when he passed this function to Bruce
    Perens \cite{DebianFAQ,DebianHistory}. Although he still works in the
    \ac{FOSS} field he is no longer involved in the Debian project.

\end{description}

\subsection{Release Process}

The used release process is highly structured and will be described in the
following.

\begin{description}

  \item[Version Naming] The Debian project uses a three digit number scheme
    which consists of a major, minor and micro number \cite{DebianReleases}.

  \item[Characterization of Major and Minor Releases] Debian has always at
    least three active releases available: stable, testing and unstable
    \cite{DebianReleases,DebianReleaseManagement}. Each of the three is a
    major release and indicated by a different major version number. The
    minor number was used until Debial 3.1 as a major release indicator,
    however this is not the case anymore. The micro version number indicates
    bug fixes to the major release.

  \item[Release Schedule] With three active release branches, the actual
    releases will change if a new stable version will be introduced
    \cite{McGovern2011,DebianReleaseManagement,DebianReleaseGoals}. In that
    case the old stable will be named as oldstable and maintained for one
    more year. The testing branch will become the new stable and the unstable
    the new testing. The Debian project does not have a fixed release
    schedule and releases when the release team and core team thought it
    would be ready. At that time a freeze was called in and a release would
    follow shortly thereafter. However there is some effort to have regular
    releases and predictable freeze schedules. For the next release the
    Debian project will try to adopt to a time based freeze and release cycle
    \cite{McGovern2011}.

  \item[Important Steps in the Schedule] As the new release schedule is not
    quite clear yet, there is no characterization of the important steps
    available. However the final freeze and the announcement of Release Goals
    by the release team are certainly important steps in the schedule.

\end{description}

\subsection{Development}

The development of the Debian project leads directly to future releases and
will be described in the following.

\begin{description}

  \item[Development Lead] The development is mostly driven by the project
    leader and the technical committee who set the goals for future releases
    \cite{DebianOrg}. Additionally the team leaders can set their own goals.

  \item[Development Workflow] As the stable branch is closed for new features
    most new features go directly into the unstable branch
    \cite{DebianFAQ,DebianDev,DebianReleaseManagement}. If those changes were
    tested for enough time eventually they will be merged with the testing
    branch. Parts of the Debian project will be either maintained by single
    Debian developers or co-maintained by others. Depending on that and the
    set goals by the project leader Debian developers adapt to that.

  \item[Feature Inclusion Process] The Debian project uses so called Release
    Goals which are proposed by Debian community members and chosen by the
    release team \cite{DebianReleaseGoals,McGovern2011}. The release team
    will decide on each goal and set it for a specific release or postpone
    it. At some point during the development the release team will announce
    the chosen Release Goals.

\end{description}

% }}}

% }}}
