\chapter{Comparison of Development Processes} % {{{
\label{cha:Comparison of Development Processes}

As the analyzed projects were described in the previous chapter, this chapter
will compare the development processes and project details with each other.

\section{Project Origin} % {{{
\label{sec:Project Origin}

All analyzed projects share a quite different history. Some were developed with
an university background like PostgreSQL or Python while other projects were
born in the \ac{FOSS} context. The GNOME or Debian project would be an example
for that. Projects like Plone or Fedora were an improvement and additional
layer to an existing project.

It is interesting to note, that many project founders tried to solve a personal
problem with the project they were about to start. KDE, Drupal, Fedora and PHP
might be notable here. However also commercial or philosophical background can
initiate a project, such as MySQL with MySQL AB or GNOME show.

\begin{table}[htb]
  \centering
  \begin{tabularx}{\textwidth}{lX}
    \toprule
    \tableheadline{Project} & \tableheadline{License} \\
    \midrule
    Debian        & Various, mainly \ac{GPL} \\
    Drupal        & \ac{GPL} \\
    Fedora        & Various, mainly \ac{GPL} \\
    GNOME         & \ac{GPL}, \ac{LGPL} \\
    KDE           & \ac{GPL}, \ac{LGPL} \\
    MySQL/MariaDB & \ac{GPL} \\
    PHP           & PHP License \\
    Plone         & \ac{GPL} \\
    PostgreSQL    & PostgreSQL license \\
    Python        & Python Software Foundation License \\
    \bottomrule
  \end{tabularx}
  \caption{Used licenses in analyzed projects}
\end{table}

Even if the number of developers increased over time, all projects were started
by a small group of people which often consisted of at most two persons. Often,
a single person was more involved in the project creation, even if other people
were involved too. Michael Widenius of MySQL/MariaDB would be a fitting match
to notice. After inception however the number of involved people grew rapidly.
This holds for all analyzed projects and is especially the case when the
project was finally released as \ac{FOSS}. Examples like PostgreSQL or Python
show the rapid increase of involved people, be it just developers or other
involved people, when finally released as \ac{FOSS}. The growth graph however
is quite similar in all analyzed projects, if one considers time and size
differences between the projects. Also it is worth noticing that almost every
analyzed project has one or more rapid developer growth periods. Those periods
can be matched with a certain major release of the projects. This becomes clear
when one examines the release and development of Python 2.0, GNOME 3.0, KDE 4.0
and Plone 4.0. All of those versions are major releases with new features and
approaches to their project goals. Apparently the development of such big
releases attracted a lot of new developers. Furthermore the size stayed quite
the same after the release.

\begin{table}
  \centering
  \begin{tabularx}{\textwidth}{llX}
    \toprule
    \tableheadline{Project} & \tableheadline{Age} & \tableheadline{Founder} \\
    \midrule
    Debian        & 1993 & Ian Murdock \\
    Drupal        & 2001 & Dries Buytaert \\
    Fedora        & 2002 & Warren Togami \\
    GNOME         & 1997 & Miguel de Icaza \& Federico Mena Quintero \\
    KDE           & 1996 & Matthias Ettrich \\
    MySQL/MariaDB & 1997 & Michael Widenius \& David Axmark \\
    PHP           & 1994 & Rasmus Lerdorf \\
    Plone         & 1999 & Alexander Limi \& Alan Runyan \\
    PostgreSQL    & 1986 & Lawrence A. Rowe \& Michael R. Stonebraker \\
    Python        & 1989 & Guido van Rossum \\
    \bottomrule
  \end{tabularx}
  \caption{Project founders and origins}
\end{table}

% }}}

\section{Community} % {{{
\label{sec:Community}

The previous project analysis has shown, that the communities of each project
seem to be quite different. This will be compared in the following sections.

\subsection{Size of the Community} % {{{
\label{sub:Size of the Community}

As all of the analyzed projects share a quite long history, a lot of people
were active in the projects. This of course biases the comparison between
communities, as the actual number of developers is quite always lower than the
total sum of developers in the project history. Also taking in mind that only
the central parts of the projects were analyzed, the resulting number can vary
a lot. For example the GNOME project claims that over 3500 people contributed
to the project. The fact that only GNOME core was analyzed and not anymore
active developers were left out reduces the finding to currently about 350
active developers of GNOME core. The same probably holds true for the Drupal
project with about 1200 enlisted developers and for the KDE project with about
1800 active contributors.

Also it is important to distinguish carefully between core developers and other
contributors. As in some projects only core developers have access to the code
repository, an analysis of code authors is not always a satisfying approach.
The Drupal project for example only has about six to ten distinct authors to
Drupal core. Only recently they adopted to give credit to the original author
instead of referring to it in the commit message. Another interesting insight
is the Plone project which claims to have about 300 active core developers, the
code repository however only shows a number of the dimension from 50 to 70
active developers at the same time. The PostgreSQL project on the other hand
gives an exact number of active and retired core developers, only leaving out
the number of minor contributors.

It is not necessarily the case that the actual number of developers is smaller,
projects like Fedora or Debian with many different aspects of work and smaller
tasks like package creation can actually have a number of active developers
which quite matches the claimed number by the project. However one has to keep
in mind that the comparison of a core piece of a project with a full operating
system might be unfair and not very significant. That said the size comparison
has to be made carefully with the above considerations in mind.

% }}}

\subsection{Communication} % {{{
\label{sub:Communication}

On a worldwide distributed project the communication inside a project is one of
the most vital parts. Every project has therefore a wide array of communication
methods in place. Quite every project uses mailing lists as it's favourite
communication method. A plausible explanation for this would probably be the
fact that it is easily scalable, open and archived.

Although every project has lots of different lists for quite every aspect in
the project, there is always one mailing list which is the most important one.
This is true for GNOME with the \emph{desktop-devel}, PHP with the
\emph{internals}, Plone with the \emph{plone-developers}, Python with the
\emph{python-dev}, PostgreSQL with the \emph{pgsql-hackers}, Fedora with the
\emph{devel} and Debian with the \emph{debian-devel} mailing list. In some
projects this single mailing list is split up into two, one more general for
the project and the second for the core project. This is the case for KDE with
the \emph{kde-devel} and \emph{kde-core-devel} mailing lists and MariaDB with
the \emph{maria-developers} and \emph{maria-captains} mailing lists. An
exception of this might be the Drupal project which uses mailing lists however
the most important communication channel is a quite mailing list akin forum on
their project website.

Additionally in every project there are lots of other direct and indirect
communications such as \ac{IRC} channels, blogs, newsletters and other in
place.

% }}}

\subsection{Conferences} % {{{
\label{sub:Conferences}

As most of the developers are living in different cities, countries or
continents, the communication is almost always done over the internet.
Therefore conferences and meet-ups provide the possibility to meet in person,
plan and design future goals more easily and to invigorate the community. Each
analyzed project has one or more annual conferences in place where developers
and users can meet. It is interesting to note that it always took some years to
get to an steady frequency. Also it seems that most projects had some years of
development behind them before the first conference was held. Along with the
growth of a project the number of attendees at a conference grew as well.
Another interesting fact might be that some projects include the conference in
their release and development schedule, for example the GNOME project in which
the conference should provide an extra development boost for the upcoming
release in autumn.

Due to the size of the project and the worldwide distribution of developers,
each project has also a lot of local meet-ups, hackfests, sprints, smaller
conferences or other workshops in place. They however focus more on specific
parts or goals of the project.

% }}}

\subsection{Roles} % {{{
\label{sub:Roles}

The analysis of the projects has shown, that all projects use a fairly
hierarchic development structure. Starting from the bottom there is always a
role for simple developers or contributors. Going the hierarchy upward, one
gets more rights but also more responsibilities. For example one could manage
certain parts of the project or provide guidance to new developers. Above the
maintainers of a certain subsystem is rather always a small group managing the
project's development. Then, at the top one can find a project leader or a
group engaging the project leader role. It is also interesting that some
projects split the same function into two roles while others only use one.
Keeping this fact and the different project scopes in mind, the used structures
are middlingly similar, especially if the projects are working in the same
field.

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \centering
  \subfloat[Drupal]
    {\includegraphics[width=.35\textwidth]{drupal/roles}} \qquad
  \subfloat[Plone]
    {\includegraphics[width=.35\textwidth]{plone/roles}} \\

  \subfloat[Python]
    {\includegraphics[width=.35\textwidth]{python/roles}} \qquad
  \subfloat[PHP]
    {\includegraphics[width=.35\textwidth]{php/roles}} \\

  \subfloat[GNOME]
    {\includegraphics[width=.35\textwidth]{gnome/roles}} \qquad
  \subfloat[KDE]
    {\includegraphics[width=.35\textwidth]{kde/roles}} \\

  \subfloat[PostgreSQL]
    {\includegraphics[width=.35\textwidth]{postgresql/roles}} \qquad
  \subfloat[MariaDB]
    {\includegraphics[width=.35\textwidth]{mariadb/roles}} \\

  \subfloat[Fedora]
    {\includegraphics[width=.35\textwidth]{fedora/roles}} \qquad
  \subfloat[Debian]
    {\includegraphics[width=.35\textwidth]{debian/roles}} \\
  \caption{Comparison of the development related roles in the projects.}
\end{figure}

Of course this structure varies over time and size of the project. The Debian
project for example which has a very long history in comparison to the others
has a quite filed segmentation with clear duties and responsibilities for each
role. A younger project like MariaDB has a simpler model, which nonetheless
has the described groups on top.

A release team seems to be very important as it exists in all projects, either
as a dedicated team or is represented by the project leader. Furthermore the
concept of having people who are responsible for certain subsystems seems to be
established widely as all bigger projects use it.

It is also interesting to note, that in projects where the project founder is
still active, the structure is formed more into a hierarchy with the founder on
top. This is true for Drupal, PHP and Python. Debian is a bit of a special case
here because the original project leader passed on his duty preserving the
project leader hierarchy. Sometimes the leader gathers other people around him
trying to be not solely responsible for the project, such one can see in the
MariaDB project. In projects, the leader is no longer involved or at least does
not hold any power, project leader teams were established. This holds for KDE,
Fedora and GNOME.

Even if projects claim to be friendly to newcomers and an open community, the
structure analyzed here shows, that one always has to start at the bottom of
the hierarchy, earning trust and providing enhancements to the projects before
being able to become a leader or holding a carrying business. 

% }}}

\subsection{Project Founders} % {{{
\label{sub:Project Founders}

The project founders played a vital role in the inception of the project. It
was already explained that even if there are more project founders, often one
single person plays the most important role. It was also pointed out that some
project founders are still active and lead the project, while others have left
their project.

Therefore the project founders of the analyzed projects can be classified into
three categories. First, project founders which are still active in the project
and have a leadership position. This is the case for the Drupal project, as
well as for Python and PHP. In all of those projects, the development structure
might look different without the leader. They define goals, releases, new
features and is often the deciding person. The opposite are projects where the
original founder no longer is present. Fedora, Debian and PostgreSQL are good
examples here. All named projects established a leadership group which defines
the future of the project. Debian still has a project leader, who however gets
voted by the community. At last there are projects, where the original leader
is still around and sometimes gives input but has no power. In the KDE and
GNOME projects the founders are working on related projects or topics and
sometimes give their opinion, but they can't decide anything. In the Plone and
MariaDB project the founders are members of the leadership team but have no
special role in there. At most they can give their opinion and community
members might give their notion a higher value.

% }}}

% }}}

\section{Release Process} % {{{
\label{sec:Release Process}

% }}}

\section{Development} % {{{
\label{sec:Development}

% }}}

% }}}
