\chapter{Development Process Analysis} % {{{
\label{chap:analysis}

In the following chapter the chosen \ac{FOSS} projects will be analyzed in
depth. After a thorough analysis of each project, a project analysis catalogue
will be proposed. This first part of this chapter makes heavy use of the
Grounded Theory research method presented earlier. The second part of this
chapter will then use the proposed catalogue to analyze further projects. This
is a good use case for \citeauthor{Mayring2000}'s research method for
Qualitative Content Analysis described in \autoref{chap:theoretical
background}.

\input{chapters/05_analysis_drupal}

\input{chapters/05_analysis_plone}

\input{chapters/05_analysis_python}

\input{chapters/05_analysis_php}

\input{chapters/05_analysis_gnome}

\input{chapters/05_analysis_kde}

\section{Proposition for a Project Analysis Catalogue} % {{{

To characterize the development processes of \ac{FOSS} projects, the following
catalogue was established based on the previously gathered data and analysis. By
covering all listed points one a project should have been analyzed thoroughly
and lead to a reasonable breakdown of all projects.

\subsection{Description of the Project}

A general description of the project provides information on the goals and
current state of a project. They are essential to put a project under the right
light and make it comparable with similar projects.

\subsection{Project Category}

In order to provide methods to compare projects, the project category can help
to contrast projects of the same and other categories. As such it doesn't
provide too much information about the project itself, but is useful for later
comparisons with other projects.

\subsection{Scope of Analysis}

As \ac{FOSS} projects often are hard to analyze due to their size and unclear
definition of modules, the scope will be limited to a well known subset of the
whole project. This helps to provide a thorough analysis without leaving things
unattended.

\subsection{License}

Without being licensed under a \ac{FOSS} license, a project cannot be counted
as a \ac{FOSS} project. Listing all used licenses can ensure this fact. However
it is also interesting to see whether development models and communities differ
if they are using a different \ac{FOSS} license.

\subsection{History}

A project's history shaped the community and the structure of a project to the
state it can be found today. As such the analysis of the history can bring up
interesting findings.

\paragraph{Founders}

In some projects, the original founders are still present and have an
influential voice, in others the original authors are no longer involved. To
analyze this further, the authors have to be introduced and their role will be
analyzed in the community part.

\paragraph{Project Age}

Projects always need time to evolve and find their best practise development
process. As this takes time, the project age can give some information in what
development process state this project is and how it will evolve in the future.

\subsection{Community}

The people behind the project are the driving force. Without them, a project
would not exist. Therefore it is important to analyze the diverse community of
each project.

\paragraph{Community Size}

An important measure is the approximate size of a community. Several structural
decisions and changes inside the project can depend on its size.

\paragraph{Communication}

The communication is a vital thing in an open project. It is interesting to
compare the different methods of communication in several projects depending on
their development structure and size.

\paragraph{Conferences and Meet-ups}

Meetings of developers are an important element of the development process in
\ac{FOSS} projects. It also shows, that there is enough interest available to
provide the money needed for preparing such events.

\paragraph{Roles}

The development process is often defined and lead by important roles in the
project. Also, depending on what role a person has in the project, their
influence varies.

\paragraph{Role of the Founders}

In some projects the founders are still actively involved and in some not.
Depending on the project, the founders often have a very important role in the
project development process.

\subsection{Release Process}

The release process is the action which leads to new releases. As this is a
very essential part of the development processes it will be analyzed with the
following classification.

\paragraph{Version Naming}

Each project provides a specific version naming scheme to which they adopt and
which characterizes major, minor or bug fixing releases. This information is
vital to understand the project's release schedule.

\paragraph{Characterization of Releases}

Most projects provide some kind of major and minor releases where major
releases do come with new features often backwards incompatible changes. Minor
releases on the other hand often only contain fixes. It is now interesting to
see where and how the line between the two is drawn.

\paragraph{Release Schedule}

The release schedule defines the concrete plan up to a new release and is often
either time or causal dependent. As they define deadlines or important steps in
the process of creating new releases it is most interesting to compare
different schedules.

\paragraph{Important Steps in the Schedule}

These steps often define freezes or specific points in time when all members of
the project are restricted to for example not provide new code in order to
increase the stability of the new release.

\subsection{Development}

The actual development is closely interweaved with the release process and
defines how and when the development of a project takes place.

\paragraph{Development Lead}

It is hardly imaginable that projects exist which have a completely
unstructured development process and have no development leaders in place. This
point covers, if existent, groups of people who define new features and lead
the development process.

\paragraph{Development Workflow}

The actual development process as often defined by the project leaders provides
ways and methods to propose and develop new features for the upcoming release.
It also covers the daily development and how new code finds its way into the
project's repositories.

\paragraph{Feature Inclusion Process}

Whether projects do have established a concrete process for how and when new
features are integrated in a project or not will be capped in this point.

% }}}

\cleardoublepage

\section{PostgreSQL Project Analysis} % {{{

\marginnote{\includegraphics[width=\marginparwidth]{postgresql/logo}}

The PostgreSQL project provides an \ac{ORDBMS} which runs on all major systems
such as Linux, UNIX, Microsoft Windows or Mac OS X
\cite{PostgreSQLAbout,PostgreSQLFAQ}. The group behind the project is known as
PostgreSQL Global Development Group which consists of several volunteers and
employed developers. PostgreSQL is quite popular amongst its users and has won
several prizes for the best database management system \cite{PostgreSQLAwards}.
According to the project it is the leading \ac{FOSS} database system with
thousands of users and contributors \cite{PostgreSQLPressKit}.

\subsection{Project Category}

PostgreSQL is a database management system, more specifically a \ac{ORDBMS}
\cite{PostgreSQLAbout}.

\subsection{Scope of Analysis}

The PostgreSQL Core Distribution will be analyzed, which consists of the
PostgreSQL database server, several tools and bindings around it
\cite{PostgreSQLDownload}.

\subsection{License}

The PostgreSQL project makes use of the PostgreSQL license, which is a
\ac{FOSS} license \cite{PostgreSQLFAQ,PostgreSQLLicense}. It only requires to
maintain the copyright and licensing information in the licensed source code
and therefore it is quite similar to a BSD license.

\subsection{History}

The project was started in 1986 by Lawrence A. Rowe and Michael R. Stonebraker
at the University of California in Berkeley under the name POSTGRES
\cite{PostgreSQLHistory}. Not until 1996 it was developed in a university style
fashion trying to explore new areas in database management systems. It was then
released as \ac{FOSS} by two students of Stonebraker with the new name
PostgreSQL the adopted \ac{SQL}. It then received a big development boost and
emerged to one of the leading \acp{ORDBMS}.

\subsection{Community}

The PostgreSQL project has a quite large community which will be described in
the following.

\paragraph{Community Size}

According to the project there are 6 core team members, 38 major contributors
and 42 contributors \cite{PostgreSQLContributors}. Adding no longer active
people the number sums up to around 140. The number of total contributors
might however be higher, as the project only includes people who have made
contributions over a long time.

\paragraph{Communication}

The communication mostly takes place over mailing lists, although also \ac{IRC}
channels exist. The most important mailing list for development is the
\emph{pgsql-hackers} mailing list \cite{PostgreSQLDevFAQ}.

\paragraph{Conferences and Meet-ups}

The most important international conference is the annual \emph{PgCon} which
was first organized in 2007 \cite{PostgreSQLEvents}. However there are a lot of
local conferences and workshops available.

\paragraph{Roles}

The developers are split into three groups \cite{PostgreSQLContributors}. The
core team decides on the general direction of the PostgreSQL project as well as
the release cycle and the releases. Major contributors are people who
introduced or maintain big features to the project. The contributors are all
other who provide patches to the project.

\paragraph{Role of the Founders}

Michael R. Stonebraker and Lawrence A. Rowe did not follow the project anymore
when it was published as \ac{FOSS} in 1996 \cite{PostgreSQLHistory}. They are
therefore no longer actively involved in the project.

\subsection{Release Process}

The used release process is highly structured and will be described in the
following.

\paragraph{Version Naming}

The PostgreSQL project uses a three digit number scheme which consists of a
major, minor and micro number \cite{PostgreSQLVersioning}.

\paragraph{Characterization of Releases}

The incrementation of a major or minor number defines a major release including
new features and often backwards incompatible changes
\cite{PostgreSQLVersioning}. Such a release occurs roughly once a year
\cite{PostgreSQLDevelopment,PostgreSQLFAQ}. For each major release a number of
minor releases exist which are defined by incrementing the micro version
number. Only bug and security fixes are allowed for those releases. Each major
release is supported for five years by the PostgreSQL project. However in some
cases the project can decide to drop support for a specific release if bugs
cannot be resolved without risking the stability.

\paragraph{Release Schedule}

As major releases occur every year, the project uses the same release schedule
every year along with some minor improvements from the last years
\cite{PostgreSQLDevelopment}. The release schedule gets planned and decided
during the PgCon conference. It basically starts each June with a commit review
in which possible patches might be included in the next major release. Such
reviews, also known as Commit Fest happen four times each two months apart. In
the month between an alpha release is published. After the last Commit Fest,
more alpha releases can follow, if not beta releases are published. If no more
critical errors are found several release candidates will be published which
will lead to the next major release.

\paragraph{Important Steps in the Schedule}

The Commit Fest are the only possibility to add new features to the project and
are therefore a vital part of the development process
\cite{PostgreSQLDevelopment,PostgreSQLCommitFest}. 

\subsection{Development}

The development of the PostgreSQL project is closely entangled with the release
process and will be described in the following.

\paragraph{Development Lead}

The PostgreSQL project is mostly driven by the core team
\cite{PostgreSQLDevFAQ,PostgreSQLFAQ,PostgreSQLContributors}. Quite all
decisions are made by them as well as most new features and code contributions.

\paragraph{Development Workflow}

Small patches are often submitted directly to the repository if they are done
by a major contributor or a core team member \cite{PostgreSQLDevFAQ}. All other
patches however have to be reviewed and therefore sent to the
\emph{pgsql-hackers} mailing list. New features are proposed in the Commit
Fests.

\paragraph{Feature Inclusion Process}

The already mentioned Commit Fest is a periodic break in which no new
development is done, however already existing patches are reviewed and receive
feedback \cite{PostgreSQLCommitFest}. Not only the core team does those reviews
but also other developers. A single Commit Fest usually runs for about one
month explaining the gap of one month between each Commit Fest. One such event
is lead by a Commit Fest Manager who is responsible that all submitted patches
will be reviewed. Often, a review results in a discussion on the mailing list
and follows an acceptance, a return with feedback or a rejection. A patch can
have several states, depending on whether it is in progress or finished
\cite{PostgreSQLCommitFestRunning}. If a patch is in progress, the following
states might apply.

\begin{description}

  \item[Needs Review] A patch is not reviewed and waiting for a review.

  \item[Waiting on Author] A new version of the patch is expected by the
    author.

  \item[Discussing Review Results] The review was done, however it is
    discussed on the mailing list.

  \item[Ready for Committer] The review was done and no issues were
    found. It is now waiting for a final review.

\end{description}

\noindent The states of a patch in progress are the following.

\begin{description}

  \item[Returned With Feedback] The patch was reviewed and feedback was
    given. A new version of the patch is expected for the next Commit Fest.

  \item[Rejected] The patch was rejected and won't make it into the next
    major release.

  \item[Committed] The patch was applied and no remaining issues are
    assured.

\end{description}

% }}}

\section{MySQL/MariaDB Project Analysis} % {{{

\marginnote{\includegraphics[width=\marginparwidth]{mariadb/logo}}

MySQL is according to the project the world's most used \ac{ORDBMS}
\cite{MySQLSun}. It runs on all major platforms and is widely used for many web
applications. MySQL was originally developed by MySQL AB, later bought by Sun
Microsystems and now owned by Oracle Corporation
\cite{MySQLSun,MySQLOracle,MySQLHistory}.

MariaDB was forked from the original MySQL when Oracle bought Sun Corporations
as it was unclear how the development and licensing of MySQL would change after
Oracle's acquisition \cite{MySQLAbout,MySQLBehind}. It is intended to be a
\emph{drop-in} replacement for MySQL with full compatibility to it. Also, many
of the original MySQL developers moved to the MariaDB project making it
interesting to analyze both projects together.

\subsection{Project Category}

MySQL and MariaDB are database management systems, more specifically
\acp{ORDBMS} \cite{MySQLAbout}.

\subsection{Scope of Analysis}

The analysis includes the MySQL Server package and MariaDB. Both provide a
compatible database server together with several tools for running it.

\subsection{License}

MySQL is dual-licensed under the \ac{GPL} and a proprietary license. MariaDB is
single licensed under the \ac{GPL} \cite{MySQLLicense}.

\subsection{History}

The MySQL project was started in 1994 by Michael Widenius and David Axmark by
launching the company MySQL AB \cite{MySQLHistory}. Originally it was a clone
of the mSQL project, which was quite popular at that time. In 2000 MySQL was
released as \ac{FOSS} under a dual licensing model. Sun Microsystems bought
MySQL AB in 2008 which lead to the abandonment of the MySQL founders Micheal
Widenius and David Axmark \cite{MySQLSun}. In 2010 Oracle Corporation bought
Sun Microsystems and announced changes to the current development processes
\cite{MySQLOracle}. As the future of MySQL in terms of \ac{FOSS} was quite
unclear at that time Michael Widenius forked MySQL in order to provide a
community developed, \ac{FOSS} database \cite{MySQLBehind}. The first version
of MariaDB was released in 2010 as MariaDB 5.1 which is compatible to MySQL~5.1
\cite{MySQLMariaDB5.1}. Since then the MariaDB project tries to stay compatible
with MySQL but also to provide better performance and more features.

\subsection{Community}

As most of the key-authors of MySQL moved to different projects, such as
MariaDB and as there is not much insight available about the current happenings
inside Oracle, the MariaDB community will be analyzed including facts about the
pre Oracle era of MySQL.

\paragraph{Community Size}

The specific size of the community is not known and is fractured due to
the two acquisitions by Sun Microsystems and Oracle Corporation. The newly
founded Monty Program Ab company however lists at least 20 people working on
MariaDB \cite{MySQLBehind}.

\paragraph{Communication}

The communication mostly takes place over mailing lists, although also \ac{IRC}
channels exist. The most important mailing list for development are the
\emph{maria-developers} and \emph{maria-captains} mailing lists
\cite{MySQLDevelopers}.

\paragraph{Conferences and Meet-ups}

The MariaDB project has not yet set up a conference, however the MySQL project
mostly meet once a year at the \emph{MySQL Users Conference \& Expo} which was
first organized in 2003 \cite{MySQLConference}.

\paragraph{Roles}

The developers are split into two groups. A developer is a person who produces
enhancements and new features for MariaDB
\cite{MySQLContributingCode,MySQLContributing,MySQLCaptain}. However they have
no right to commit their work before it was reviewed. The captains are
developers who are working for a long time for the project and have made
substantial improvements. To become a captain one has to make a formal request
on which the other captains will vote \cite{MySQLCaptain}. Captains give the
direction of the project, do the code reviews and take care of the project.
Finally a Release Coordinator exists who normally is a captain
\cite{MySQLReleaseCoordinator}. By definition the coordinator gains no
additional rights and only leads the communication and release management of
the project.

\paragraph{Role of the Founders}

Micheal Widenius took a vital role in the fork and new project MariaDB
\cite{MySQLBehind,MySQLAbout}. If nevertheless MariaDB is mostly driven by
MariaDB captains (which he belongs too) he has an important voice in the
community and still gives general directions. David Axmark however left Sun in
2008 and is no longer actively involved in either the MySQL nor MariaDB
project. He also does not follow their development anymore.

\subsection{Release Process}

The used release process is structured and will be described in the following.

\paragraph{Version Naming}

The MySQL/MariaDB project uses a three digit number scheme which consists of a
major, minor and micro number \cite{MySQLVersion}.

\paragraph{Characterization of Releases}

The incrementation of a major number defines big and often incompatible changes
to their predecessors \cite{MySQLVersion}. In the current releases it marks the
file format in which the database is stored. A major release is defined by an
incrementation of the minor number and allows new features to be added to the
release. In most cases the releases are backwards compatible, but if not, there
are always upgrade paths available \cite{MySQLMariaDB5.1}. Finally, the micro
number defines minor releases in which only bug and security fixes may apply.

\paragraph{Release Schedule}

The MariaDB project does not have a fixed release schedule and is quite similar
to the MySQL release schedule
\cite{MySQLReleaseCriteria,MySQLRoadmap,MySQLPlans}. It has criteria in place
when specific releases can happen. After the last stable major release, all new
features for the next stable major release will be collected. Every feature a
MariaDB developer agrees to implement in the timeframe to the next major
release will be considered as a new feature. After most features are nearly
finished one or several alpha releases follow. The criteria for beta releases
are that the proposed features are finished and no serious bugs are open. The
gamma or release candidates are believed to be ready for general usage, however
testing is still required. Finally the stable release should have no more open
bugs or critical errors and is ready for general usage.

\paragraph{Important Steps in the Schedule}

The feature proposal period, alpha and beta releases are of course the most
important steps in this schedule as they restrict new features or code changes
further \cite{MySQLReleaseCriteria}. For example, after a beta release the
whole \ac{API} cannot be changed anymore.

\subsection{Development}

The development of the MySQL/MariaDB project is loosely entangled with the
release process and will be described in the following.

\paragraph{Development Lead}

The development of the MariaDB project is mostly driven by the MariaDB captains
\cite{MySQLContributing,MySQLDevelopers}. The founder of MariaDB and MySQL
Micheal Widenius plays an important role and even if not stated by the project
has an important voice about the direction.

\paragraph{Development Workflow}

Small patches are often submitted directly to the repository if they are done
by a captain. All other patches by developers will be reviewed and applied if
they suit the project well \cite{MySQLRoadmap,MySQLPlans}. Bigger features will
be accepted after each major release.

\paragraph{Feature Inclusion Process}

After a major release a developer can propose new features \cite{MySQLPlans}. A
feature will be accepted if a developer accepts that feature and is willing to
implement it \cite{MySQLContributingCode,MySQLContributing}. It then will move
to the so called worklog page of MariaDB where other developers see the current
status of a feature. A feature can have multiple states, such as the following.

\begin{description}

  \item[Assigned] The feature was assigned to a developer who is in
    charge to provide the feature for the next release.

  \item[Cancelled] The feature was cancelled for this release but might
    be proposed for the next.

  \item[Code-Review] The feature will be reviewed by other MariaDB
    developers and captains.

  \item[Complete] The feature is ready and will be part of the next
    release.

  \item[In-Documentation] The feature is completed code-wise but still
    has to be documented.

  \item[In-Progress] A developer is currently implementing this feature.

  \item[On-Hold] The feature will not be developed further until the
    status can be changed back to in progress. This could happen if a
    technical problem arises or the feature is put up for a discussion.

  \item[Un-Assigned] The feature is still unassigned and no developer has
    claimed this feature yet.

\end{description}

% }}}

\section{Fedora Project Analysis} % {{{

\marginnote{\includegraphics[width=\marginparwidth]{fedora/logo}}

The Fedora project provides a so called Linux distribution which is a
collection of \ac{FOSS} and is based on the Linux kernel
\cite{FedoraAbout,FedoraTogami}. The distribution is also called Fedora
operating system or Fedora project, however the latter one refers to the
community which builds the project. As it only features \ac{FOSS}, the Fedora
operating system is also \ac{FOSS}. The mission of the project is to lead the
advancement and it is also known to incorporate new products and software very
quickly. The project is mostly sponsored by Red Hat, however due to its
structure it can be seen as independent from a companies influence.

\subsection{Project Category}

The Fedora operating system is, as the name already states, an operating system
\cite{FedoraAbout}.

\subsection{Scope of Analysis}

The operating system provided by the Fedora project will be analyzed, which
consists of a large collection of \ac{FOSS} needed to run and work on a
computer.

\subsection{License}

As the projects goal is to provide a \ac{FOSS} based product only Free and Open
Source licenses are allowed \cite{FedoraLicensing}. The project provides a list
of acceptable licenses. For own software creations the \ac{GPL} is mostly used.

\subsection{History}

The original Fedora project was created in 2002 by Warren Togami in order to
enhance the quality and number of packages available for the at that time
existing Red Hat Linux distribution
\cite{FedoraAbout,FedoraTogami,FedoraHistoricalSchedules}. In 2003 the
development of Red Hat Linux stopped and was merged with the Fedora project.
Since then the Fedora project provides a community distribution while Red Hat
Enterprise Linux is an officially supported Linux distribution which derives
from Fedora versions. Until 2006 the operating system was known as Fedore Core.
Later the project changed the name to Fedora. The name Fedora originates from
the Red Hat logo which shows a person with a fedora hat.

\subsection{Community}

The Fedora project has a quite large community which will be described in the
following.

\paragraph{Community Size}

The exact size of the community is unknown, however the project consists of a
quite large group \cite{FedoraStatistics}. For example the total number of
active accounts exceeds 30,000 people. This number however does not describe
the actual size accurately as it includes many users of the operating system.

\paragraph{Communication}

Most of the communication takes place over mailing lists
\cite{FedoraAbout,FedoraJoin,FedoraSIG}. Each of the mailing lists is quite
focused on a certain sub-topic, however the most important general development
related mailing list is the \emph{devel} mailing list. Additional communication
happens through several \ac{IRC} channels, forums, blogs or the weekly
newsletter \cite{FedoraFWN,FedoraCommunicating}.

\paragraph{Conferences and Meet-ups}

Since 2005 the Fedora project organizes the \emph{Fedora Users and Developers
Conference} (FUDCon) which is held annually in various places around the world
\cite{FedoraFUDCon}.

\paragraph{Roles}

The Fedora project uses a quite flat structure with several teams and \acp{SIG}
\cite{FedoraJoin,FedoraCommunicating,FedoraSIG}. Each team or \ac{SIG} is in
charge for a specific sub project or area in the project. Each team is lead by
one or several people. The usual way to be a part of a specific team is to
provide several contributions until one can apply. Examples for such teams and
\acp{SIG} are Release Engineering, Desktop or Usability. The technical
leadership is handled by the \ac{FESCo} which is a community elected team and
handles new features, \acp{SIG} or technical matters \cite{FedoraFESCo}. The
general direction and guiding decisions however are handled by the Fedora
project board which consists of five community elected people and four
appointed by Red Hat \cite{FedoraBoard}.

\paragraph{Role of the Founders}

Warren Togami is still involved in the Fedora project, however he focuses more
on Fedora related projects, such as SpamAssassin or K12Linux which is a
distribution built on top of Fedora \cite{FedoraTogami}.

\subsection{Release Process}

The release process used is highly structured and will be described in the
following.

\paragraph{Version Naming}

The Fedora project uses a single number versioning scheme
\cite{FedoraHistoricalSchedules,FedoraLifeCycle}. This single number defines
major releases.

\paragraph{Characterization of Releases}

There are no minor releases since updates to the operating system come via
single updates of the affected packages
\cite{FedoraHistoricalSchedules,FedoraLifeCycle}. Therefore each incrementation
of the version number defines a new major release.

\paragraph{Release Schedule}

The Fedora project uses a fixed release cycle with a new major release every
six months \cite{FedoraLifeCycle,FedoraReleaseEngineering}. Each major release
is then maintained until one month after either two releases or 13 months. The
release schedule is proposed by the Release Engineering team and approved by
the \ac{FESCo}. In some cases, the schedule can be slightly adjusted if
critical bugs appear and can't be solved in the original time frame. After a
major release the planning and development can start. One week before the alpha
release, no new feature will be accepted. The alpha release will be followed by
a beta and final release candidate. Depending on whether each of the
previous releases was postponed or not the final release will be published
approximately six months after the previous major release.

\paragraph{Important Steps in the Schedule}

The most important steps are the feature acceptance, feature freeze and feature
complete milestones in the release schedule \cite{FedoraLifeCycle}. In each of
the named steps the \ac{FESCo} will decide if a feature will be accepted or be
in the next release depending on its completeness.

\subsection{Development}

The development of the Fedora project is quite entangled with the release
process and will be described in the following.

\paragraph{Development Lead}

The development of the Fedora project is mostly driven by the \ac{FESCo} which
decides on new features and the technical direction of the project
\cite{FedoraFESCo}.

\paragraph{Development Workflow}

The development process of the Fedora project is quite open
\cite{FedoraReleaseEngineering,FedoraSIG}. As already stated above, there are
many \acp{SIG} available which steer the development of a certain area in the
project. Depending on the \ac{SIG} the development workflow can vary, however
the general direction is always given by the \ac{FESCo}.

\paragraph{Feature Inclusion Process}

To propose a feature for the next major release a formal feature proposal has
to be made \cite{FedoraFeatures,FedoraFESCo}. This includes a description of
the problem, an owner, the current status and several other points. Any Fedora
community member can propose them and the \ac{FESCo} decides on the acceptance
of the feature. Additionally a feature can be dropped if it is not completed at
the feature freezer, before the beta release or if the owner does not update
the feature status. A feature can be either incomplete when the proposal is not
ready, ready when it is disposed for review, ready for \ac{FESCo} when it can
be proposed to the committee and finally accepted if the voting by the
\ac{FESCo} was successful.

% }}}

\section{Debian Project Analysis} % {{{

\marginnote{\includegraphics[width=\marginparwidth]{debian/logo}}

The Debian project provides an operating system on top of various kernels, such
as the Linux kernel \cite{DebianAbout,DebianPorts}. Even if there are other
kernels available, such as the FreeBSD, NetBSD or Hurd kernel, Linux is the
most prominent one. Therefore, Debian often gets called Debian \ac{GNU}/Linux.
The mission of the Debian project is to provide a free operating system in the
meaning of \ac{FOSS}, to provide a full featured operating system with high
standard and to have a big evolving community. The Debian project is known as a
very stable operating system and is therefore often used on servers.

\subsection{Project Category}

The Debian operating system is, as the name already states, an operating
system.

\subsection{Scope of Analysis}

The Debian \acs{GNU}/Linux operating system provided by the Debian project will
be analyzed, which consists of a large collection of \ac{FOSS} needed to run
and work on a computer.

\subsection{License}

The project's goal is to provide an operating system consisting entirely of
\ac{FOSS} \cite{DebianLicense,DebianFAQ}. However, it is possible to install
non-free software too. According to the \ac{DFSG} the project itself only
accepts free software licenses, but the \ac{GPL} is mostly used for own
creations.

\subsection{History}

The Debian project was created by Ian Murdock in 1993, in order to provide a
distribution which was developed in an open style and in the spirit of a
\ac{FOSS} development process \cite{DebianAbout,DebianHistory,Sadowski2008}. At
that time, the concept of a distribution was quite new and Debian can be
counted as one of the early distributions, although it was not the first. The
name is a fusion between Ian and the first name of his wife, Debra. The Debian
project established several policies and contracts to ensure the future freedom
of the project. Debian is still the most significant distribution that is not
backed by a commercial entity.

\subsection{Community}

The Debian project has a large community available which will be described in
the following.

\paragraph{Community Size}

The community size is quite large and ranges between 800 and 1000 active
developers \cite{Perrier2011,DebianOrg}.

\paragraph{Communication}

Most of the communication is handled through several mailing lists
\cite{DebianMailingLists,DebianFAQ,DebianNewMembers}. For quite every aspect or
subproject there is a mailing list available. The most important for
development is the \emph{debian-devel} mailing list. Additionally there are
many \ac{IRC} channels, forums and blogs available.

\paragraph{Conferences and Meet-ups}

The most important conference in the Debian project is the annual
\emph{DebConf} which took first place in 2000 \cite{DebianDebConf}. So far it
was organized in various regions and continents worldwide.

\paragraph{Roles}

The Debian project has a quite hierarchical structure with several teams
\cite{DebianOrg,Sadowski2008}. A Debian Contributor is any person who
contributes to the project, but has no additional rights \cite{DebianFAQ}.
Debian Maintainer have restricted access capabilities \cite{DebianMaintainer}.
To become a Debian Maintainer one has to go through a formal process requesting
the role. At least one Debian Developer must then approve this person. The
Debian Developers have full access rights and often maintain parts of the
project \cite{DebianDev}. On top there is a project leader who gets elected by
the Debian community every year \cite{DebianOrg,DebianVoting}. Beneath the
project leader there is a technical committee which drives the project's
technical decisions. Additionally there are many teams in charge for parts of
the project, such as Release Engineering, Ports or the distribution of the
project.

\paragraph{Role of the Founders}

Ian Murdock led the project from its beginning until 1996 as the project
leader when he passed this function to Bruce Perens
\cite{DebianFAQ,DebianHistory}. Although he still works in the \ac{FOSS} field
he is no longer involved in the Debian project.

\subsection{Release Process}

The used release process is highly structured and will be described in the
following.

\paragraph{Version Naming}

The Debian project uses a three digit number scheme which consists of a major,
minor and micro number \cite{DebianReleases}.

\paragraph{Characterization of Releases}

Debian has always at least three active releases available: stable, testing and
unstable \cite{DebianReleases,DebianReleaseManagement}. Each of the three is a
major release and indicated by a different major version number. The minor
number was used until Debial 3.1 as a major release indicator, however this is
not the case anymore. The micro version number indicates bug fixes to the major
release.

\paragraph{Release Schedule}

With three active release branches, the actual releases will change if a new
stable version will be introduced
\cite{McGovern2011,DebianReleaseManagement,DebianReleaseGoals}. In that case
the old stable will be named as oldstable and maintained for one more year. The
testing branch will become the new stable and the unstable the new testing. The
Debian project does not have a fixed release schedule. A new release is
announced when the release team and core team think it is ready. At this time a
freeze is called in and a release follows shortly thereafter. However there is
some effort to have regular releases and predictable freeze schedules. For the
next release the Debian project is trying to adopt a time based freeze and
release cycle \cite{McGovern2011}.

\paragraph{Important Steps in the Schedule}

As the new release schedule is not clear yet, a characterization of the
important steps is not possible. However the final freeze and the announcement
of Release Goals by the release team are certainly important steps within the
schedule.

\subsection{Development}

The development of the Debian project leads directly to future releases and
will be described in the following.

\paragraph{Development Lead}

The development is mostly driven by the project leader and the technical
committee who set the goals for future releases \cite{DebianOrg}. In addition
the team leaders can set their own goals.

\paragraph{Development Workflow}

As the stable branch is closed for new features most new features go directly
into the unstable branch \cite{DebianFAQ,DebianDev,DebianReleaseManagement}. If
those changes have been tested for long enough they eventually will be merged
with the testing branch. Parts of the Debian project will either be maintained
by single Debian developers or co-maintained by others. Depending on that and
the goals set by the project leader, Debian developers start to work.

\paragraph{Feature Inclusion Process}

The Debian project uses so called Release Goals which are proposed by Debian
community members and chosen by the release team
\cite{DebianReleaseGoals,McGovern2011}. The release team will decide on each
goal and set it for a specific release or postpone it. At some point during the
development the release team will announce the chosen Release Goals.

% }}}

% }}}
