\section{GNOME Project Analysis} % {{{

\marginnote{\includegraphics[width=\marginparwidth]{gnome/logo}}

GNOME is a desktop environment for UNIX based systems. It is composed by a
collection of tools and programs including a desktop shell in order to provide
all the essential utilities a user might need when working with a computer.
Officially, GNOME is part of the GNU project and licensed under the \ac{GPL}
and the \ac{LGPL}. The name GNOME was initially an acronym for \emph{GNU
Network Object Model Environment}, however that acronym was dropped. The GNOME
project targets for ease of use and user friendliness and therefore aims for
coherent and good user interfaces \cite{GNOMEHIG}, accessibility,
internationalization, regular releases and good support for users and
developers. GNOME is a modular project, meaning that it consists of several so
called modules, which can be either applications, libraries or utilities. Since
the release of GNOME 3, the modules were reorganized into a GNOME core suite
and a GNOME apps suite. GNOME core provides everything to run a basic desktop
system and will therefore be analyzed in this context.

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{gnome/commits_by_author}
  \caption{Monthly activity of the most active GNOME core developers}
\end{figure}

\subsection{History} % {{{

GNOME was first announced and started in 1997 by Miguel de Icaza and Federico
Mena Quintero as a counterpart to KDE
\cite{German2003,GNOMEAbout,GNOMEAnnouncement}. Both were attending university
at that time when they set their aim to produce a desktop environment using
only free software technologies. KDE relied on the Qt widget toolkit, which at
that time was licensed under a proprietary software license. Instead of using
Qt, the GTK+ toolkit originally developed for the GIMP graphics editor was
used. The GNOME project quickly grew into a large project which nowadays is the
most popular desktop environment for UNIX type operating systems. The desktop
as well as the developer technologies can be found on workstations and large
enterprises but also on mobile devices. With the recent GNOME 3 release the
project did a major overhaul with a significant redesign of the desktop
environment and an entirely new user interface \cite{GNOMEPress}.

% }}}

\subsection{Community} % {{{

The GNOME project consists of a large user and developer community. While there
were about 3500 people contributing to GNOME and it's applications, there is
also a big community around the project, which for example uses GNOME
technologies such as GStreamer or GTK+ \cite{GNOMEAbout,GNOMETeams}.

Most of the communication inside the project is handled over mailing lists and
\ac{IRC} channels. Quite every GNOME module has a dedicated mailing list or
\ac{IRC} channel. Global decisions are mostly handled over the desktop-devel
mailing list. Additionally blogs are widely spread in the GNOME community and
contributors often write blog posts about achieved things, wishes and starting
discussions.

Next to several hackfests each year, the community holds a yearly conference
under the name GUADEC. It stands for GNOME User and Developer European
Conference, and while the conference only took place in Europe so far it is
nevertheless considered an international conference \cite{GNOMEGUADEC}.

\begin{table}
  \centering
  \begin{tabularx}{\textwidth}{lXl}
    \toprule
    \tableheadline{Event}                   & \tableheadline{Venue}       & \tableheadline{Date} \\
    \midrule
    GUADEC \MakeUppercase{\romannumeral 1}  & Paris, France               & 2000 \\
    GUADEC \MakeUppercase{\romannumeral 2}  & Copenhagen, Denmark         & 2001 \\
    GUADEC \MakeUppercase{\romannumeral 3}  & Seville, Spain              & 2002 \\
    GUADEC \MakeUppercase{\romannumeral 4}  & Dublin, Ireland             & 2003 \\
    GUADEC \MakeUppercase{\romannumeral 5}  & Kristiansand, Norway        & 2004 \\
    GUADEC \MakeUppercase{\romannumeral 6}  & Stuttgart, Germany          & 2005 \\
    GUADEC \MakeUppercase{\romannumeral 7}  & Vilanova i la Geltrú, Spain & 2006 \\
    GUADEC \MakeUppercase{\romannumeral 8}  & Birmingham, England         & 2007 \\
    GUADEC \MakeUppercase{\romannumeral 9}  & Istanbul, Turkey            & 2008 \\
    Desktop Summit                          & Gran Canaria, Spain         & 2009 \\
    GUADEC \MakeUppercase{\romannumeral 10} & The Hague, Netherlands      & 2010 \\
    Desktop Summit                          & Berlin, Germany             & 2011 \\
    GUADEC \MakeUppercase{\romannumeral 11} & La Coruña, Spain            & 2012 \\
    \bottomrule
  \end{tabularx}
  \caption{Previous and planned GNOME conferences}
\end{table}

Due to the large and modular composition of the GNOME project, there are
similar roles for each module. Only very few teams and roles stand above all
modules. In this respect the developer community can be very much be seen as a
flat structure \cite{GNOMETeams,German2003,GNOMEDesignTeam,GNOMEReleaseTeam}.

\begin{description}

  \item[Committer] Any person who contributed a reasonable amount of
    improvements to the GNOME project or to a single module can become a
    committer. A committer has full read and write access to all GNOME
    repositories. Though each commit will be reviewed and approved by the
    maintainer of the module. To get such an account, one has to make a formal
    request to the Accounts Team along with one or several vouchers who can
    confirm your contributions to the GNOME project. Every module maintainer or
    translation team leader can act as a voucher. Furthermore will the voucher
    be responsible for the actions of the requesting person on the
    repositories.

  \item[Maintainer] Every module has one or more maintainers who will be
    responsible for releases, reviewing patches and the direction of a module.
    They are the main contact for the community and therefore act as the leader
    of a certain module. A single module can be maintained by multiple
    maintainers and one maintainer can maintain several modules. To become a
    maintainer one has either to create a new module which gets incorporated
    into the GNOME project or be asked by another maintainer.

  \item[Release Team] This team is responsible for a wide range of tasks
    concerning the development process of the GNOME project. Their tasks
    include for example creating a development schedule, making and publishing
    releases, approving or rejecting freeze break requests and defining the
    module list for GNOME releases. The team size is not fixed and can vary
    over time. Membership is only done through an invitation and often only
    when one person leaves the team. The leaving person may recommend a new
    team member on which the team will decide.

  \item[Design Team] Since GNOME 3 the Design Team holds a much more important
    role in the GNOME project as they primarily define the design of the GNOME
    user experience. This is done by designing the user interface and workflow
    of GNOME modules. Additionally they play an important part in the feature
    based development process.

  \item[GNOME Founders] Miguel de Icaza and Federico Mena Quintero, the
    original GNOME founders, played an important role in the first years of the
    GNOME project. Nowadays however they are more active in projects around
    GNOME technologies and often act as visionaries.

\end{description}

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{gnome/commits_by_year}
  \caption{Yearly overview of commits to GNOME core}
\end{figure}

% }}}

\subsection{Release Process} % {{{

The GNOME project uses a version naming scheme with three numbers however
distinguishes only between major and minor releases
\cite{GNOMEDevelopmentSchedule,GNOMESchedule}. The numbers are however
nevertheless called major, minor and micro numbers. An incrementation of the
first number only happens when the project does a ground-breaking change, such
as using GTK+2 for GNOME 2.x or the new user experience with the GNOME shell
and GTK+3 for GNOME 3.x. For the minor version number the GNOME project uses
odd numbers indicating an unstable series and even numbers for stable releases.
For example the unstable 3.1.x series will become into the stable 3.2.x release
series.

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{gnome/releases}
  \caption{Major Releases of GNOME}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{gnome/punchcard}
  \caption{Time based view on commits of Core contributors}
\end{figure}

The release schedule is fixed and every six months a new major release will
appear. To achieve this, a release schedule is published by the release team
every six months \cite{GNOMEDevelopmentSchedule}. Over the years it stayed
mostly the same, while a few minor changes might occur to comprise conferences
or holidays. The release schedule includes future stable minor releases, the
two schedules overlap.

Each stable release series consists of at least three releases which will be
named with x.y.0 to x.y.2. Of course, a module maintainer can decide to provide
more stable releases \cite{GNOMEReleaseTeam}. The unstable series consists of
eight releases which are distributed over six months. The schedule furthermore
includes proposal and freeze periods which will be described in the following
\cite{GNOMEDevelopmentSchedule,GNOMESchedule}.

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{gnome/gnome-timeline}
  \caption{Release Schedule which will lead to GNOME 3.4}
\end{figure}

\begin{description}

  \item[Feature proposal period] After a major release gets published the
    feature proposal period starts. GNOME developers can propose features for
    the next major release and discuss them with the community. Approximately a
    month later, when the first unstable release gets published, the proposal
    period ends. Around two weeks later the release team meets and decides
    about proposed features with the community input up to this point.

  \item[The Freeze] With the release of the first beta release the first freeze
    is in action. No user interface changes, new features, developer API
    changes are allowed without approval from the release team. This excludes
    of course bug fixes. Additionally new translatable strings must be
    announced to the translation and documentation team.

  \item[String Freeze] With the second beta release no string changes are
    allowed anymore without confirmation of both the release and translation
    team.

  \item[Hard Code Freeze] With the release of the release candidate no source
    code changes are allowed without approval of the release team.
    Documentation and translation however can continue. After publishing the
    next major GNOME release the Hard Code Freeze ends but all other freezes
    remain in action for the stable series.

\end{description}

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{gnome/commits_by_month}
  \caption{Amount of commits per month of Core contributors}
\end{figure}

% }}}

\subsection{Development} % {{{

Before the release of GNOME 3, the release team would decide together with the
community about the inclusion of new modules. The development of each module
was planned an executed by the maintainers. Since GNOME 3, the development
workflow changed into a more design driven development approach. This means
that all new features concerning user interface or applications have to go
through the design team \cite{GNOMEDesignTeam}. This leads to a consistent
process which delivers a uniform user interface. However the design team has no
sort of decision making authority and a maintainer can ignore the design
proposal by the design team.

Next to the design driven approach the module inclusion changed to a feature
inclusion approach \cite{GNOMEFeatures3.4,GNOMERoadMap}. Every GNOME
contributor can create a feature proposal in which he describes a feature he
would like to see in the next stable GNOME release. A feature proposal is
composed by a description of the problem which will be solved, one or more
authors, a list of involved parties and the current status of the proposal. All
of these fields are required and a feature will not be accepted until all are
filled out. After each major release and until about a month later, one can
propose a feature for inclusion. The community has time to discuss the features
and improve them for roughly one and a half months. After that time the release
team will meet and depending on the feedback of the community decide about the
inclusion of each feature. If a feature gets accepted the author of the feature
will be the leader of it and responsible for the completion. With the release
of the first beta release and the establishment of the Feature, UI and
\ac{API}/\ac{ABI} Freeze the feature has to be finished and working. If not, it
may be postponed to the next major release.

\begin{figure}[htbp]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{gnome/authors_by_month}
  \caption{Amount of distinct authors of GNOME core over time}
\end{figure}

% }}}

% }}}
